GWEN IFILL: Good evening. I'm
Gwen Ifill. Judy Woodruff is
away.
On the "NewsHour" tonight:
Interest rates stay at record
lows -- how the Federal
Reserve's
decision affects Americans
and the economy.
Also ahead this Thursday: the
key moments on stage, as
presidential candidates make
their appeals to voters,
highlights from the second
Republican debate.
Plus: papal economics. As the
U.S. readies for a visit from
Francis, Paul Solman reports
on the pope's critique of
capitalism, an economic model
that the pope says overlooks the
poor.
REV. JIM WALLIS, President &
CEO, Sojourners: And Jesus says,
you either serve God or mammon.
That's pretty radical. Mammon
means money. You serve God or
you serve money.
GWEN IFILL: All that and more
on tonight's "PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
GWEN IFILL: The word from the
Federal Reserve today, interest
rates aren't going anywhere
just yet.
The announcement ended weeks of
speculation, but Wall Street
wasn't sure what to make of
the news. The Dow Jones
industrial average lost 65
points to close below 16675. The
Nasdaq
rose four points. And the S&P
500 slipped five. We will hear
some of what the Fed had
to say, and examine its
reasoning, right after the news
summary.
The flash point in the crisis
engulfing Europe shifted to
Croatia today with fresh scenes
of chaos. Thousands of people
poured into the country at a key
border crossing with
Serbia, after Hungary closed
its border yesterday.
Jonathan Miller of Independent
Television News reports from the
scene.
JONATHAN MILLER: On the Croatian
front of the crisis threatening
to overwhelm this continent,
even riot police proved
hopelessly unable to contain the
onward surge of refugees and
migrants.
Hours waiting for a train which
never came in blazing heat with
insufficient water and
in a total information vacuum
was too much for the multitude
who had streamed across
the Serbian border into the
European Union in the past 24
hours alone.
The desperation here is
incredible. They have been
pushing women through and
manhandling
little children over their heads
to get them out of this crush,
this chaos the knock-on
effect of the closure of the
gates to Hungary 100 miles
northeast. It's been obvious for
days that a new route would open
up through the Western Balkans,
but somehow no one had
expected this.
The U.N. Refugee Agency was
nowhere to be seen. The handful
of Croatian Red Cross workers
were stretched beyond their
limits. Women fainted, children
became separated from their
parents, but police didn't use
their batons. From early
morning, fresh arrivals have
streamed
across the fields to the
Tovarnik station, just 500
meters inside Croatia.
Thousands crowded on to the
railway tracks. They have been
told the train was coming to
take them to Zagreb. There were
Afghans, Syrians and Iraqis.
There were Somalia and Eritreans
too, many here acutely aware
that in Western Europe, where
they're headed, there are large
numbers of people who do
not want to let them in.
MAN: We want to live in peace
because we leave Syria to live
in peace in Europe.
JONATHAN MILLER: As the
temperature rose, so did the
frustration. No sign of any
train.
Croatia's interior
minister turned up.
Are you overwhelmed?
RANKO OSTOJIC, Croatian Interior
Minister: Absolutely, yes,
because this country in this
moment, the figures are very
important. During the nine
months, Croatia has 1,500
illegal
immigrants altogether. We have
in this 24 hours 6,500, and you
ask me, are we overwhelmed?
Yes. Absolutely yes.
JONATHAN MILLER: He said he
spoke to the U.N. Refugee Agency
to inform them this was their
problem now. After weeks and
sometimes months on the road,
this international mass
migration
is unstoppable.
There has been barbed wire and
tear gas, water cannon, boat
capsizes, thirst, hunger and
exhaustion, but they keep on
coming, and they keep on keeping
on.
GWEN IFILL: Austria and Slovenia
have now imposed new border
checks ahead of an expected
surge in the thousand
traveling through Croatia.
In South Sudan, a truck carrying
gasoline exploded today, killing
more than 100 people.
It happened in a town west of
the capital, Juba, as people
were trying to siphon fuel.
Officials say a crowd had
gathered around the truck, when
someone lit a cigarette.
Meanwhile, twin suicide bombings
in Iraq killed at least 23
people and wounded nearly 70.
The bombers blew themselves up
at police checkpoints in mainly
Shiite sections of Baghdad. The
Islamic State group
claimed responsibility.
Thousands in Chile spent the day
sifting through debris after a
powerful earthquake struck
last night. At least 10 people
were killed. The quake had a
magnitude of 8.3, so strong
that was felt across much of
South America. Today, people in
small towns along and near
the Pacific coast picked through
what was left after the quake
and small tsunamis hit.
MAN (through translator): We
never imagined the water could
do so much damage. The
earthquake
didn't do that much damage. It
was the water. It was the
tsunami that destroyed part of
our lives. It destroyed our
memories, our pictures.
GWEN IFILL: More than a million
people were forced to evacuate
their homes, but most of
Chile was spared major damage.
The military in Burkina Faso
seized power today,
short-circuiting a democratic
transition.
Instead, the army installed a
general with close ties to a
former president who was ousted
last year. Troops then broke up
attempts to protest the coup.
Hospitals filled with victims
of the street clashes. At least
three people were killed, and
dozens more were wounded.
Back in this country, two more
bodies were found in burned-out
homes in Northern California.
That makes five people killed in
two major wildfires in recent
days. The latest victims
died in the so-called Valley
Fire raging near Napa Valley,
north of San Francisco.
And in Southern Utah, the death
toll hit 19 in Monday's flash
floods. Search teams discovered
another body today.
An American soldier accused of
desertion in Afghanistan went
before a military judge today
for a crucial hearing. Sergeant
Bowe Bergdahl disappeared from
his post in 2009 and was
held by the Taliban for five
years before being exchanged for
five Taliban commanders.
The hearing at Fort Sam Houston
in San Antonio will decide if
Bergdahl is court-martialed.
The three Americans who helped
foil an attack on a train bound
for Paris got a White House
welcome today. President Obama
posed for pictures with Airman
1st Class Spencer Stone, Army
Specialist Alek Skarlatos and
Anthony Sadler, and thanked them
for confronting a would-be
gunman.
BARACK OBAMA, President of the
United States: They represent
the very best of America,
American
character. And, you know, it's
these kinds of young people who
make me extraordinarily
optimistic and hopeful
about our future.
GWEN IFILL: The men were also
given medals at a Pentagon
ceremony. They had already
received
the Legion of Honor Medal,
the highest award in France.
And there's word of major
progress against a deadly
disease. U.N. health agencies
report
malaria deaths have fallen 60
percent in the last 15 years.
That means more than six million
lives saved, the vast majority
of them are children in Africa.
Officials also say the
disease is far from eradicated.
There have already been 214
million new cases just this
year.
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
what the Federal Reserve's
decision on interest rates
means for American business;
highlights from last night's
Republican debate, and much
more.
It's been seven years since the
Federal Reserve took the unusual
step of lowering interest
rates to near zero. More
extraordinary, rates have not
moved up since then.
For much of this summer, the
expectation was that this would
be the day that the Fed would
announce a change. But, once
again, the Fed decided to leave
rates where they were.
Jeffrey Brown picks up
the story from there.
JEFFREY BROWN: Expectations
began to change just weeks ago
following market turmoil and
worries over China. During a
press conference this afternoon,
Federal Reserve Chairwoman
Janet Yellen spoke of those
factors, but also said a hike
may still be in the cards.
JANET YELLEN, Federal Reserve
Chair: Most participants
continue to think that economic
conditions will call for or make
appropriate an increase in the
federal funds rate by the
end of this year.
Of course, there will always be
uncertainty. We can't expect
that uncertainty to be fully
resolved. But in light of the
developments that we have seen
and the impacts on financial
markets, we want to take a
little bit more time to evaluate
the likely impacts on the
United States.
JEFFREY BROWN: Some insight now
into this decision and where the
Fed may head soon from
a close observer.
Krishna Guha is the vice
chairman of Evercore ISI, an
independent investment banking
advisory
firm. From 2010 to 2013, he
served as head of communications
at the New York Federal
Reserve.
Nice to see you again.
KRISHNA GUHA, Vice Chairman,
Evercore ISI: Great to see you,
Jeff.
JEFFREY BROWN: The Fed did make
clear that the recent turmoil in
the markets and Europe
was a factor here.
KRISHNA GUHA: I think that's
right, but it's not just so much
the turmoil in the markets,
per se.
The Fed is saying is, it looks
like the market weakness was
driven by concerns about China
and the emerging markets. And if
that's right, that's something
the Fed should be paying
attention to, not market
volatility from day to day, but
concerns about global growth.
That's really what
they focused on.
JEFFREY BROWN: The release today
says the Fed is -- quote --
"monitoring developments
abroad." It's a sort of --
that bland kind of statement.
Of course, they're always
monitoring developments abroad,
but this says they're really
watching
it and worried.
KRISHNA GUHA: It says they're
paying close attention to these
developments.
Now, I think one of the reasons
why markets, the stock market
was a bit jittery today is
people were wondering, does the
Fed know something we don't? I
don't think that's the case. I
think they're being prudent. I
think they're saying, things
look weak in China and other
emerging markets, weaker than we
thought a few months ago, and
the markets are telling
us that there may be some
problems here, so let's take a
short time out at least and
evaluate
these developments, see what
happens. And then we can make a
better assessment of what
they mean for the U.S.
JEFFREY BROWN: Well, a short
time out. There were some real
divisions that have come out
about what happens next. Right?
There was a minority, but still
a strong minority, suggesting
nothing should happen even
through -- at least through the
end of the year.
KRISHNA GUHA: So I think --
you're, of course, right, and
the Fed officials give you their
dots, where they think
interest rates will go.
JEFFREY BROWN: The tally.
(CROSSTALK)
KRISHNA GUHA: Yes, that's right.
So, most of them said they still
expect to have that hike by
year-end. Four are now saying,
no, 2016 or maybe even 2017. So
I think they're leaning towards
December, but they're giving
themselves the option to delay
if the world looks threatening
at that point.
JEFFREY BROWN: Is this unusual,
in your experience, to have that
kind of division vocalized or
put down in the tally form?
KRISHNA GUHA: You
know, not really.
And I think that's a good thing,
not a bad thing, because you
don't want group think
at a central bank. You want
people to have their own
perspectives, difference of
views.
Right now, there is, I think, a
fairly cohesive mainstream view
that we're getting closer
to the point at which the
domestic economy will support a
rate hike, but it's worth paying
attention to these
international developments.
Now, you have some people --
Jeff Lacker dissented -- who
would like to hike today, and
you have
got a few who are already
pushing back into next year, but
I think the mainstream is
saying,
by the end of the year,
probably, but we will keep an
eye on things.
JEFFREY BROWN: But, just
briefly, so in the meantime, you
do have people breathing a sigh
of relief in Europe, that are
elsewhere who are looking to the
U.S. economy as a driver
still.
KRISHNA GUHA: Yes to some
degree, but it's also the case
that, of course, if you're
sitting
in Europe right now, the fact
that the U.S. is not raising
rates means the dollar is a
bit weaker, means their
currency, the euro, is a big
stronger.
And if your economy still has a
lot of challenges, like the
European economy, you would
actually
perhaps prefer the Fed was
hiking, so your currency would
weaken and you would pick up
some more trade.
JEFFREY BROWN: All right.
Krishna Guha, thank you so much.
KRISHNA GUHA: Thank you.
GWEN IFILL: The Republican
candidates now have two debates
under their belts and they're
now working to capitalize on
last night's meeting -- one
clear winner, CNN, which scored
nearly 23 million viewers.
While Donald Trump continues to
be the marquee draw, business
executive Carly Fiorina and
Senator Marco Rubio also grabbed
their share of the spotlight.
President Reagan's Air Force One
served as the backdrop for 11
Republicans who hope to
have their own presidential
plane someday. But they first
had to survive the night.
As expected, the primary target
was front-runner Donald Trump,
who has upended the race and
left previously strong
contenders like Wisconsin
governor Scott Walker in the
dust.
GOV. SCOTT WALKER (R-WI),
Presidential Candidate: This is
what's wrong with this debate.
We're
not talking about real issues.
And, Mr. Trump, we don't need an
apprentice in the White House.
We don't need an apprentice in
the White House. We have one
right now.
GWEN IFILL: Walker and former
Florida Governor Jeb Bush tried
to use the face-off to
reestablish
lost footing by linking Trump
to the leading Democrat.
JEB BUSH (R), Presidential
Candidate: You got Hillary
Clinton to go to your wedding.
DONALD TRUMP (R), Presidential
Candidate: That's true. That's
true.
JEB BUSH: Because you gave her
money. Maybe it works for
Hillary Clinton.
DONALD TRUMP: I was
-- excuse me, Jeb.
JEB BUSH: It doesn't work
for anybody on this stage.
DONALD TRUMP: Jeb, I was a
businessman. I got along with
Clinton. I got along with
everybody.
That was my job, to get
along with people.
JEB BUSH: But the
simple fact is...
DONALD TRUMP: I didn't want
to -- excuse me one second.
JEB BUSH: No. The simple fact
is, Donald, you could not
take...
DONALD TRUMP: OK, more
energy tonight. I like that.
GWEN IFILL: Trump came prepared
to criticize Bush as well over
his stance on women's health
programs.
DONALD TRUMP: I know, but why
did you say it? I heard it
myself. Why did you say it?
JEB BUSH: We increased child
support -- we increased child
support with a broken system
by 90 percent.
DONALD TRUMP: You said you're
going to cut funding for women's
health. You said it.
JEB BUSH: I have a proven
record. I have a proven record.
DONALD TRUMP: You said it.
GWEN IFILL: Carly Fiorina, a
former Hewlett-Packard CEO who
was relegated to the second-tier
debate
last time, seized the moment to
slash at Trump while presenting
herself as a leader.
CARLY FIORINA (R), Presidential
Candidate: I also think that one
of the benefits of a
presidential campaign is, the
character and capability,
judgment and temperament of
every
single one of us is revealed
over time and under pressure.
GWEN IFILL: The only woman in
the field also came prepared to
belittle Trump, who in an
interview, had
criticized her looks.
CARLY FIORINA: You know, it's
interesting to me Mr. Trump said
that he heard Mr. Bush
very clearly and what Mr. Bush
said. I think women all over
this country heard very clearly
what Mr. Trump said.
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
GWEN IFILL: Trump, in turn,
dismissed Fiorina as a failure
in business.
But New Jersey Governor Chris
Christie, struggling in the
polls himself, repeatedly
returned
to his theme of the night: that
the campaign wasn't about them.
GOV. CHRIS CHRISTIE (R-NJ),
Presidential Candidate: While
I'm as entertained as anyone by
this
personal back-and-forth about
the history of Donald and
Carly's career, for the
55-year-old
construction worker out in that
audience tonight who doesn't
have a job, who can't fund his
child's education, I have got to
tell you the truth. They could
care less about your
careers. They care about theirs.
GWEN IFILL: Each member of the
11-candidate field took turns
trying to break through.
For Florida Senator Marco Rubio,
it was on foreign policy.
SEN. MARCO RUBIO (R-FL),
Presidential Candidate: The
United States military wasn't
built to
conduct pinprick attacks. If the
United States military is going
to be engaged by a commander
in chief, it should only be
engaged in an endeavor to win.
And we're not going to authorize
use of force if you're not put
in a position where they can
win.
GWEN IFILL: And in an earlier
forum, South Carolina Senator
Lindsey Graham targeted former
Senator Rick Santorum
on immigration reform.
SEN. LINDSEY GRAHAM (R-SC),
Presidential Candidate: How many
democrats did you have on your
bill?
RICK SANTORUM: I don't know how
many Democrats I had on my
bill...
SEN. LINDSEY GRAHAM: I
can tell you. None.
RICK SANTORUM: But, the point is
-- the point is, is that I had a
bill...
SEN. LINDSEY GRAHAM:
That went nowhere.
GWEN IFILL: The attention
turns now to the Democrats.
Clinton used an appearance on
"The Tonight Show" last night to
mock her competition.
JIMMY FALLON, Host, "The Tonight
Show With Jimmy Fallon": How are
you, Hillary? Haven't
seen you since my last wedding.
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON (D),
Presidential Candidate: Well,
I'm sure I'll see you at the
next one.
The Democrats' first
debate is October 13.
GWEN IFILL: Stay with us.
Coming up on the "NewsHour":
making sense of Pope Francis'
critique of capitalism; an
American-trained soldier now a
leader for the Islamic State
group; how body cameras
change our view of policing and
justice; and after a Texas teen
is arrested for taking
a homemade clock to school, what
it's like to grow up as a Muslim
in America?
But, first, General Motors and
the government reached a
settlement today over how the
automaker
handled a defect that led to
deaths, injuries and the recall
of millions of vehicles. The
agreement may resolve many of
the cases, but some remain
concerned that the government
may have let GM off too lightly.
Hari Sreenivasan has the story
from our New York studios.
PREET BHARARA, U.S. Attorney,
Southern District of New York:
This office and GM have entered
into a deferred
prosecution agreement.
HARI SREENIVASAN: The formal
announcement from U.S. attorney
Preet Bharara in New York
followed years of recalls,
lawsuits and congressional
hearings. GM agreed to pay $900
million over
faulty ignition switches that
shut off engines and disabled
safety systems. The company now
admits it hid the deadly
defect for more than a decade.
PREET BHARARA: They didn't tell
the truth in the best way that
they should have to the
regulator and to the public
about a serious safety issue
that risked life and limb.
HARI SREENIVASAN: An independent
monitor will check GM's
compliance, and pending criminal
charges could be dropped after
three years. But the deal does
have its critics.
In a statement today, Democratic
Senators Ed Markey and Richard
Blumenthal said: "The
124 families who lost loved ones
deserved individual criminal
accountability. It is
shameful that they will not
be held fully accountable."
Back in New York, prosecutor
Bharara defended the agreement.
PREET BHARARA: We're not done
and it remains possible that we
will charge an individual,
but the law doesn't always let
us do what we wish we could do.
HARI SREENIVASAN: And in Warren,
Michigan, GM's chief, Mary
Barra, summed up the automaker's
perspective at an
employee town hall.
MARY BARRA, CEO, General Motors:
This is a tough agreement. It
further highlights the
mistakes that were made by
certain people in GM and it
imposes significant penalties
and obligations.
HARI SREENIVASAN: GM also today
said it will spend $575 million
to settle civil lawsuits.
Let's learn more about this
settlement and the questions
surrounding a lack of charges.
David Shepardson of The Detroit
News was at today's press
conference and joins me now.
It seems that we kind of learned
today the limits of the law. GM
wasn't necessarily found
guilty of the ignition switch
problem, but more of the wire
fraud connected to the cover-up.
DAVID SHEPARDSON, The Detroit
News: It's basically the same
charge the federal prosecutors
have
used for years for gangs and
different crimes, you know,
using a telephone or any
electronic
device across state lines.
And the U.S. attorney said there
is not a statute that makes it a
crime solely for an
auto company to sell defective
vehicles, and that they were not
able to determine whether
individual employees, you know,
actually were engaged in a
cover-up or intentionally
committing
a crime without that specific
statute. And so they said
they're not giving up, and
they're
not ruling out any criminal
charges in the long run. But,
realistically, this is probably
the end of the criminal
side of this case.
HARI SREENIVASAN: A lot of
families of the victims are
saying, listen, my loved one
died,
and there's not a single human
being at General Motors that's
responsible for this that we
can find criminally
negligent here?
DAVID SHEPARDSON: You have 124
deaths, and GM's independent
compensation fund is tied
to this, 270 injuries,
some of them very serious.
And what the U.S. attorney said
is, GM had this silent culture
where no one was taking
responsibility. The CEO has
called it a culture of
incompetence and neglect. And,
essentially,
because of this huge incompetent
company, no one is being held
responsible. And it is
-- you know, like you said,
there are a lot of families.
And the U.S. attorney personally
met with the families and said
he was sorry and he
said they're as aggressive as
any other office in the country,
but they can't find a statute
to specifically go after
those individual employees.
HARI SREENIVASAN: That's
probably discomforting for any
auto owner, that there is no law
that
can actually prosecute this.
But how much has GM paid so far?
And it seems like this is less
than what Toyota was fined
with for the sticky accelerator
problem a couple years ago.
DAVID SHEPARDSON: That's right.
In fact, the Toyota sudden
acceleration problem, which was
linked to about five or six
deaths,
resulted in a $1.2 billion fine.
GM is paying to the U.S.
government $900 million. There's
about $1.2 billion more in
settlements of lawsuit,
including to shareholders and
people
who sued over ignition switch
defects. And then there's the
independent compensation
fund that's awarded
about $600 million.
What the U.S. attorney said was,
we're essentially going easier
on GM because they fully
cooperated,
that not only did their
attorneys, you know, turn over
information to us before they
even
told the executives, but they
created this compensation fund
and they quickly said, we're
going to change our culture.
Toyota was accused of misleading
government regulators and not
coming clean for much longer.
It took them four-and-a-half
years to reach that settlement.
So that's part of the reason
for the difference in the fines.
HARI SREENIVASAN: All right. And
this also doesn't count what it
is going to cost to
fix the ignition switches
of all these recalled cars.
DAVID SHEPARDSON: That's right.
GM last year took about $4
billion in charges for -- much
of it in the 30 million vehicles
they recalled, including another
12 million vehicles beyond the
ones involved in this
criminal case for other ignition
problems, for other key issues.
So the expenses are
significant. There's many,
hundreds of lawsuits left to be
resolved. So it's not over yet.
HARI SREENIVASAN: But what are
the next steps? Is GM
essentially on some sort of
probation
for the next few years? They
didn't have to admit any
wrongdoing, but keep their nose
clean?
DAVID SHEPARDSON: Well, they
didn't have to plead guilty.
They were charged with two
felonies.
But they were required to admit
to the information that's laid
out in these two charges.
And so, for the next three
years, they will have a consent
decree. They will be on
probation.
If they violate the law, the
government could seek to
reinstate those felonies and
actually
going through conviction. But
the reality is, there are not a
lot of penalties to a
big company.
Companies don't go to jail. You
know, individuals do. And for
the most part, Wall Street have
basically baked in this cost of
the settlement, so the stock was
up a little bit today.
HARI SREENIVASAN: All right.
David Shepardson of The
Detroit News, thanks so much.
DAVID SHEPARDSON: Thanks, Hari.
GWEN IFILL: Pope Francis'
upcoming visit to the U.S. next
week is generating huge interest
and expectation.
Part of that excitement is
rooted in the different tone the
pope has taken on a number of
issues,
from marriage to the role of
women in the church. But he has
also issued a tough critique
of capitalism and called for
more action on climate change.
We kick off our coverage of the
pope's trip, which will continue
all next week, with a
look at those issues from our
economics correspondent Paul
Solman.
It's part of our weekly series
Making Sense, which airs every
Thursday on the "NewsHour."
PAUL SOLMAN: Are you excited
that the pope is coming here?
CHILDREN: Yay!
WOMAN: It's a blessing that the
pope is coming to visit us,
especially the poor people that
need a little bit more.
PAUL SOLMAN: A senior center in
East Harlem, the poorest part of
Manhattan and the one
with the closest ties to Latin
America, home to Jorge Mario
Bergoglio, the Argentinean
Jesuit priest now known
as Pope Francis.
MELISSA MARK-VIVERITO, New York
City Council Speaker: And just
south of this district,
we have the most wealthy
district in the city of New York
in the Upper East Side.
PAUL SOLMAN: Melissa
Mark-Viverito is the first
Puerto Rico-born speaker of the
New
York City Council, where she
also represents El Barrio.
MELISSA MARK-VIVERITO: There is
a real contrast, which speaks to
really the vision and, I think,
the philosophy of what
the pope is all about.
PAUL SOLMAN: The pope put that
vision and philosophy bluntly in
June, with his controversial
encyclical on climate change and
poverty, blaming what he calls
unbridled capitalism
for ruining the Earth, with
tragic effects on those he cares
most about, the world's
poorest.
MELISSA MARK-VIVERITO: I think
that that's the reason why the
pope's visit is so important,
is to continue to shine the
light on those challenges and
challenge us, as government
and as leaders in our
communities, to overcome them.
PAUL SOLMAN: And presumably,
that's why Francis will come
here, to challenge government to
do more for the environment and
for the poor. But will
government respond?
The issue has already entered
the race for president.
JEB BUSH (R), Presidential
Candidate: I don't get economic
policy from my -- from my
bishops
or my cardinals or my pope.
PAUL SOLMAN: Conservative
Americans like presidential
candidate Jeb Bush, a convert to
Catholicism,
say the pope should steer
clear of politics.
JEB BUSH: I think religion ought
to be about making us better as
people and less about
things that end up getting
into the political realm.
PAUL SOLMAN: But Francis seems
to think politics is about
making us better as people, more
generous, kinder and gentler to
the poor, to each other, to the
Earth.
Activist Naomi Klein:
NAOMI KLEIN, Activist: It kind
of felt a little bit like being
invited into the world's oldest
secret society.
PAUL SOLMAN: Klein is one of the
pope's more surprising new
advisers, a self-described
secular feminist.
NAOMI KLEIN: My views about
climate change about the economy
are pretty radical. There
are people out there who are
saying this pope is a closet
socialist, and then for them to
invite somebody who's written a
book whose subtitle is
"Capitalism vs. the Climate" is
kind of saying, well, we're
not backing down, frankly.
PAUL SOLMAN: Moreover, says
progressive evangelical Jim
Wallis, Pope Francis is squarely
within
the tradition of his
vow-of-poverty namesake and of
Jesus, who told the rich man
hoping
to enter the kingdom of heaven
that he should give away all his
possessions.
REV. JIM WALLIS, President &
CEO, Sojourners: And Jesus says,
you either serve God or mammon.
That's pretty radical. Mammon
means money. You serve God or
you serve money.
PAUL SOLMAN: Isn't that why
people say that Jesus was a
socialist?
REV. JIM WALLIS: How we decide
the morality, the integrity, the
righteousness of an economy
is not how the wealthiest do,
but how the poorest do. That's
in the text. Now, that
is more radical than
communism and socialism.
PAUL SOLMAN: I tried to be even
more provocative with Marie
Dennis, who heads a Catholic
peace
and justice movement.
So, is the pope a communist?
MARIE DENNIS, Co-President, Pax
Christi International: No, the
pope is not a communist. Pope
Francis
keeps -- as the church ought to
do, keeps a distance from any
particular system, whether
it's communism or socialism or
capitalism, in order to be able
to critique whatever system
is not serving the needs
of people and the planet.
PAUL SOLMAN: But in his
encyclical, he is stridently
anti-capitalist, or at least the
unbridled version,
as he calls it.
MARIE DENNIS: His critique of
unbridled capitalism is very
strong, absolutely, and he is
very
serious about it, because of his
experience. He lived his whole
life in a Latin America
that was on the receiving end of
some very destructive economy
policies. And I think
what Pope Francis is trying to
do is amplify voices that have
been calling for a different
system for decades.
PAUL SOLMAN: A different
economic system? Is what the
pope argues for really what the
world's poor need?
RICHARD SYLLA, ProfessorMD-BO ,
New York University: Well, I
would say that the pope
is probably not a
well-trained economist.
PAUL SOLMAN: New York University
professor Richard Sylla:
RICHARD SYLLA: And economic
historians like myself study
these things, and we're pretty
big fans of capitalism.
PAUL SOLMAN: The pope's argument
isn't that, historically,
capitalism has not done a good
job. It's that now capitalism is
a new form of colonialism, is
suppressing the poor and
keeping them down.
RICHARD SYLLA: I have to
disagree with that, because, in
this age of globalization, my
view is that capitalism is
actually working to make the
lives better for the poorer
people
of the world.
PAUL SOLMAN: But there's so much
poverty in the world. Hasn't
capitalism created that?
RICHARD SYLLA: No, capitalism is
not the culprit. Capitalism,
when it's allowed to do its
work,
some of us would say work its
magic, it has a tremendous
ability to raise living levels
for the people who live under
that system. That doesn't mean
it's perfect, but I think
to sort of say that capitalism
is the problem, let's get rid of
it, as the pope may be hinting,
is to throw the baby out
with the bathwater.
PAUL SOLMAN: The pope, however,
is more than hinting. He writes
that -- quote -- "Whatever
is fragile, like the
environment, is defenseless
before the interests of a
deified market,
a market that doesn't take into
account fundamental rights of
the poor and underprivileged."
The pope being unavailable to
respond to economist Richard
Sylla's defense of markets, I
asked
his radical bedfellow,
Naomi Klein, for a reply.
NAOMI KLEIN: Yes, this is a
system that has pulled many
people out of poverty, but it
has also thrown many people into
destitution. Now, my goal here
is not to say capitalism
has never done anything good.
It's to say we need a better
system, because now the fate
of our species hangs
in the balance.
PAUL SOLMAN: Or, as
Reverend Wallis puts it:
REV. JIM WALLIS: Is our economy
today good news for the poor?
The economy is for, more
and more, the very top, the very
few, and the middle are all very
insecure. And half
of God's children, half the
world's people are left behind
by the economy. God's economy
is very simple. There is enough,
if we share it. It's really as
simple as that.
PAUL SOLMAN: Well, maybe it's
simple, maybe it isn't. But that
seems to be what Pope Francis
believes. And the New York
neighborhood he will visit, with
its homeless, its mentally
ill, its drug-ravaged denizens,
cries out for help, says local
resident Rodney Johnson.
RODNEY JOHNSON, East Harlem:
There's a lot of changes that
need to be made.
PAUL SOLMAN: Like what?
RODNEY JOHNSON: Like people
getting housing, people really
getting help on their drug
problems,
people -- somebody really
sitting down and understanding
people on what they been through
in life, and what they need in
order to get off the streets,
because there's really no
-- there's really no compassion
out here enough to help people
on their feet. It's not out
here no more. There used
to be, but it's gone.
PAUL SOLMAN: From East Harlem,
among other locations, this is
economics correspondent
Paul Solman, reporting
for the "PBS NewsHour."
GWEN IFILL: New reports surfaced
today that the U.S. and Russia
will begin military-to-military
talks about Syria, even as
Vladimir Putin moves to bolster
his old ally Bashar al-Assad.
But will Russia also be fighting
a man they have battled before?
Chief foreign affairs
correspondent Margaret Warner
reports.
MARGARET WARNER: The man is Abu
Omar al Shishani, the Islamic
State military commander for the
Northern District of Syria, seen
here last August as the group
pursued its lightning
march across Northern
and Central Iraq.
ABU OMAR AL SHISHANI, Islamic
State (through translator): It
is time for the sons of the
Islamic State to defend the
Islamic State of Iraq and Sham
and defend our imam, who
the world gathered against
with all its strength.
MARGARET WARNER: Unlike most
I.S. fighters, he was speaking
Russian. His real name is
Tarkhan Batirashvili. He's an
ethnic Chechen reportedly born
30 years ago in Georgia, then
part of the Soviet Union, to a
Christian father and Muslim
mother. Tapped as a special
forces
soldier in the Georgian army, he
fought fiercely against the
Russian army when the two
countries
went to war over the province
of South Ossetia in 2008.
Mitchell Prothero of McClatchy
Newspapers has just written an
exhaustive profile of
al Shishani, with startling new
information. I spoke with him
via Skype from his bureau
in Northern Iraq.
How significant a military
figure is al Shishani in ISIS?
MITCHELL PROTHERO, McClatchy
Newspapers: If he's not the
overall military commander for
the Islamic State, he's
definitely in charge of the
Northern Syrian Front, which is
one
of the most active and serious.
MARGARET WARNER: Now, you
uncovered a very interesting new
twist in this story, with
-- some of his skills actually
came from training by the
Americans.
MITCHELL PROTHERO: In 2005 and
'6, there was a lot of
cooperation -- and there still
is
today on some level -- between
the American intelligence
services and the U.S. military
in training the Georgian armies
and their intelligence services.
He had been tapped for training
as a special forces unit. And
that was done through the
United States. But, again, there
was nothing that would flag him
as a security risk on
paper.
MARGARET WARNER: How effective
was he as a fighter against the
Russians back in 2008?
MITCHELL PROTHERO: He was
considered a rising star of the
Georgian military.
He was a senior non-commissioned
officer in a special forces unit
that was tasked with
basically being the eyes and
ears of the Georgian military
and was one of their most
successful
battle commanders during the
very brief 2008 war before the
Russians sort of rolled over
them.
MARGARET WARNER: Yet, scarcely
six years later, he was in
Syria, swearing allegiance to
the
Islamic State. It's an unusual
evolution for a man brought up
in a moderate Muslim enclave
in the predominantly
Christian nation of Georgia.
Shishani was arrested in 2010 on
what his family says was a
trumped-up weapons possession
charge and he spent 16 months in
prison. Once released, he fled
to Istanbul.
MITCHELL PROTHERO: At that
point, appears to have been
radicalized somewhat, maybe his
prison experience. And people
also suggested that the death of
his mother to cancer shortly
after his release from prison
sort of led to him having a
religious awakening, and he
adopted her religion. His
father, as we said, is
Christian.
And by June of 2012, he shows up
in Aleppo as a little-known sort
of foreign fighter
in a small group of guys, and
slowly -- or, actually, rather
quickly, built a movement
that slowly then became
part of the Islamic State.
I was told that part of why he
was able to be convinced to
bring his unit and to join
the Islamic State was a promise
that the Islamic State would
organize basically an emirate
in the Caucasus that would
then go after the Russians.
MARGARET WARNER: And, says
Prothero, al Shishani has
emerged as an effective
recruiter of other
Muslim fighters from other
former Soviet republics.
MITCHELL PROTHERO: The Chechens
and a lot of these other former
Russian-speaking province
guys have a tendency to be very
professional, military-wise.
They're considered sort of the
shock troops or special forces
of the Islamic State. They're
moved around from place to place
to fight in specific areas. They
were part of the Mosul
operation, although a lot of
that was local Iraqis. There is
always sort of a core of
these just very disciplined and
experienced foreign fighters, as
opposed to the guys that
are coming from Europe.
MARGARET WARNER: What makes him
so particularly effective? What
makes him a standout in that
group of already effective
and disciplined fighters?
MITCHELL PROTHERO: It sounds
like he's quite capable of
thinking strategically and
tactically
from a military standpoint that
you don't always get with a lot
of these guys, even
if they're fierce fighters.
It takes more to run an army.
MARGARET WARNER: Today, al
Shishani is on the U.S. Treasury
Department's list of specially
designated global terrorists and
he carries a $5 million bounty
on his head.
So, as the Russian military
appears to be moving its way
into Syria, this hardened
Chechen
fighter may have the battle
coming that he's long been
waiting for.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm
Margaret Warner in Washington.
GWEN IFILL: Now: how body
cameras on police and cell
phones everywhere are changing
our
views on justice.
Charlayne Hunter-Gault has the
latest installment in our series
Race Matters.
CHARLAYNE HUNTER-GAULT: From the
Michael Brown fatal shooting by
a policeman in Ferguson,
Missouri, last year to New York
City last week, when a
plainclothes police officer
roughly
threw former tennis pro James
Blake to the ground, police have
been under fire for attacks
on black people.
But, in many instances, police
representatives have pushed
back, insisting their offices
were merely doing their jobs.
How to narrow such profound
fractures between the public
and the police is the subject of
extensive research by Brian
Jackson, a senior political
scientist at the RAND
Corporation, a nonprofit think
tank working on improving policy
and
decision-making.
Brian Jackson, thank
you for joining us.
Your study focused on what you
describe as profound fractures
between the public and
the police, and you say it's
been a long trend. Can you
expand on that just a little
bit?
BRIAN JACKSON, RAND Corporation:
Well, of course, policing in the
United States isn't
something that started a week
ago. It's something that started
at -- near the beginning of our
country.
And the relationships that
police have with their
communities goes back to events
that
happened during the era of
segregation, during war
protests, when police didn't
always take
actions that today, you know,
we see as appropriate.
And so for individuals who have
an interaction with a police
officer today, they're often
seeing that interaction as part
of a pattern that went back a
long time. And this is part
of why it's very challenging to
build and maintain trusted
relationships between police
officers and different
communities, because the police
have to sort of take on and
understand
this history that goes back
probably well before any of the
officers who were on the
force now were police officers.
CHARLAYNE HUNTER-GAULT: So, it's
going on in the heads of black
people or people who
are victims, but not in
the heads of policemen?
BRIAN JACKSON:
Well, yes, indeed.
And it's not just a minority
community thing -- issue. I
mean, you have people who were
members of protest communities
during the '60s and '70s, who
have very different views
of police.
Really, this is a question of
the many communities that exist
in the United States and the
fact
that all of them need good
relationships with the police
departments that protect them.
CHARLAYNE HUNTER-GAULT: But I
think you see statistics showing
that blacks are three times
as likely as whites to be killed
by the police. That widens the
fractures, doesn't it?
BRIAN JACKSON: Absolutely. When
you have a sort of preexisting
breakdown in trust, these
very serious incidents -- and a
police use of force is always a
serious incident when
it results in loss of life of a
citizen. That's always something
that is a challenge in a
democracy.
CHARLAYNE HUNTER-GAULT: So how
do you see race fitting into
this?
BRIAN JACKSON: Our country has a
very complex history around
race, to make a very sort of
obvious and understated point.
And so race is something that is
behind all of this. And it's not
that individuals are
necessarily racist. There are
folks who study unconscious
stereotypes and how race can
affect
the way that people make
judgments about another person.
CHARLAYNE HUNTER-GAULT:
Unconscious stereotypes?
BRIAN JACKSON: Indeed.
I mean, someone may view someone
else as a threat because of
stereotypes that exist around
race, where they may not even
realize that that is what is
driving their decision. And
so there are folks who are
looking at, OK, how do you train
people to recognize this,
to understand that there are
stereotypes, to let people step
back from themselves as
they're making these incredibly
important decisions, sometimes
in a very short time,
and work through those issues to
make sure that they're making
the right decision for
the right reasons, not because
of a stereotype that they have
learned overtime?
CHARLAYNE HUNTER-GAULT: So are
you saying that this can be
fixed?
BRIAN JACKSON: I'm an optimist
by nature, so, yes, I am saying
it can be fixed, although
this is a training issue.
It's about sort of teaching
people about other cultures.
It's -- this is embedded in sort
of the notions that are behind
community policing, of police
departments, building
connections
with the community, so they have
a way of understanding where
people are coming from,
understanding what their needs
are, the problems that police
should be involved in solving.
And part of that is about
building these person-to-person
relationships that mean people
are making
judgments less on mental
shorthand, and more about, you
know, who is this person who is
in from of me and understanding
what is going on.
CHARLAYNE HUNTER-GAULT: In your
report, you talk about narrowing
these gaps and divisions
being a two-way street, that the
police have responsibilities and
the community has
responsibilities.
How do you work that out?
BRIAN JACKSON: When you look at
the rhetoric around sort of
challenges about police
oversight,
police are concerned that
members of the public who don't
know what high-pressure
interactions
where the police officers are at
risk work, and are concerned
that they're not going to
make fair judgments about -- you
know, about the police officer's
decision-making after
the fact.
Members of the public are
obviously concerned about that
decision-making, because it's in
that decision-making where we
get uses of force, where we get
decisions about who gets
searched and who doesn't, who
gets stopped and who doesn't.
And so there is an element in
this where, you know, increasing
transparency in those
interactions to give the public
more data, more information --
I'm a researcher, so I
go back the data and
information as a solution.
CHARLAYNE HUNTER-GAULT: So, it
sounds like that may be what is
happening in the Ferguson
case, where we have just had a
report by a commission that
looked into those incidents
there.
And they said that people need
to engage with the report,
discuss, debate and argue about
it, even though it is likely to
be difficult and take a long
time. Is that what we're looking
at?
BRIAN JACKSON: They are going in
the right direction. These are
not easy questions. I
mean, we expect the police to
use force in situations to save
lives.
And we expect -- but we expect
them to do it appropriately.
Where is the line? Well,
that's a tough -- that's a tough
line to draw, and it varies
place to place. In a democracy,
that's done by sort of people
coming together and having those
debates, having those
discussions.
You know, broken windows
policing, or order maintenance
policing, as it's called, was
a philosophy of trying to
control crime. But that approach
has a lot of impacts on the
communities that are affected by
it. So, part of what needs to
happen there around a policing
tactic is for people to come
together and say, well, do the
benefits that we think we're
getting from reducing crime
worth the side effects that this
has on everybody in the
community where it's done?
Is there a right and a wrong
answer there? No, but the answer
for me there is going for
more transparency, so these bad
incidents that happen -- and
there are terrible incidents
that happen, where we get the
one cell phone video. They
travel the Internet. They have
a very large effect.
On that same day, a lot of
interactions between the police
and the public happened that
were
very positive. Sometimes, those
go viral. For example, there was
the case of the African-American
police officer who was helping a
white supremacist at a
Confederate Flag rally who was
being
overcome by the heat. And a
picture of this officer leading
this gentleman away so he
could sort of get water,
again, went viral.
CHARLAYNE HUNTER-GAULT: Is there
anything in this whole equation
that gives you optimism
that this fracture can be
narrowed and maybe even
resolved?
BRIAN JACKSON: Yes, absolutely.
I mean, we're seeing sort of
explorations with use of
technology like body cameras,
although they're not the answer
to everything. We're seeing, you
know, police departments
proactively sort of reach out to
communities. We're seeing the
public debate.
And the public debate is part of
this, about, you know, what the
country wants from its
police forces, what the right
balance to strike in a democracy
about the power given to police
vs. citizen oversight. What the
society wanted from police 30
years ago is not the same as
what society wants
from police now.
And I don't know what the
changes will be, but I'm quite
sure that, in 30 years, there
will be changes. And so what I'm
optimistic about is that we have
a process going now
where people are focusing now on
this issue and where we will
sort of work through the
problem set as a country to come
up with better solutions over
time.
CHARLAYNE HUNTER-GAULT:
Brian Jackson, thank you.
BRIAN JACKSON: Thank
you very much.
GWEN IFILL: On Monday, we will
expand on that conversation in a
PBS prime-time special,
"America After Charleston."
Join me as we explore the many
issues propelled into public
discourse after a white gunman
shot and killed nine
African-American worshipers in
Charleston's Emanuel AME Church
last June.
Fourteen-year-old Ahmed Mohamed,
who was suspended from an
Irving, Texas, school after
officials
mistook his school project for a
bomb, spent another day out of
school today.
Mohammed's arrest -- he'd
brought a homemade clock to
school -- stirred a global
social
media frenzy.
Hari's back with that.
HARI SREENIVASAN: The hashtag
#IStandWithAhmed went viral for
a third straight day on
Facebook,
Twitter and elsewhere. President
Obama jumped in yesterday, too,
inviting him to visit with
a tweet that read: "Cool clock,
Ahmed. Want to bring it to the
White House? We should
inspire more kids like you to
like science. It's what makes
America great."
For his part, the teen said he
didn't plan to return to the
school and was grateful for
overwhelming support.
AHMED MOHAMED, Student: I
brought the clock to impress my
teacher. But when I showed it
to her, she thought it
was a threat to her.
So -- so, it was really sad that
she took the wrong impression of
it, and I got arrested
for it later that day.
Thank you to all my supporters
on Twitter, Facebook, all social
media. Thank you all
for helping me. I would have
never got this far if it wasn't
for you guys, and not just
you guys, everybody.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Some
perspective from a part of the
American Muslim community.
Nihad Awad is the executive
director of the Council on
American-Islamic Relations,
which
has been working with
Ahmed and his family.
Mr. Awad, thanks for joining us.
So, tell me about your
contact with the family.
NIHAD AWAD, Executive Director,
Council on American-Islamic
Relations: Yes.
From the beginning, when this
happened to the family, the
family contacted our office
in Dallas. And we recognized
that this was another case of
unfortunate Islamophobia and
targeting of young people just
because of their faith
tradition, not because of their
deeds or their behavior.
And we managed to tell his
story. And his narrative now
dominated the story, because
the school officials, I think,
failed him when they accused
him, when they called the
police on him. He was arrested.
He was detained, interrogated
without the presence of his
parents.
And this was totally
unnecessary.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Mr. Awad, why
do you think this story is
resonating so much, even to
non-Muslims around America?
NIHAD AWAD: Well, I think
it's a human story.
This is a young genius inventor
who wanted to impress everyone,
and he wanted to do better.
He wanted to build things to
improve the world. I spoke to
him yesterday, and he told me
that
he wants to create things. And
his father told me that he fixes
everything around the
house.
So, at this young age, to have a
brilliant teenager who is
involved and has a passion
in science and innovation, we
should cherish this. And that's
why I believe he was able
to tell his story through his
invention. He's young. He's
cute, adorable, intelligent. And
I think that got him a lot of
support, definitely with the
help of an advocacy organization
like ours. We managed to
also get his story out.
HARI SREENIVASAN: So, are you
advocating or counseling him to
take legal action? And,
if so, what's the basis of
that action, against whom?
NIHAD AWAD: I think the most
important thing is to restore
his confidence.
The president has supported him,
and he stood for him publicly.
And he led by example. Mark
Zuckerberg and other leaders in
our society, in the industry, in
the faith tradition have
stood by him. And that was the
most important thing, is to
restore and reinstate his
confidence
and his dreams to change the
world to be a better world.
The legal action, I think, is
being considered. We just want
to make sure that this story
and this experience doesn't
happen to other people.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Is this
indicative or emblematic of
actions against Muslims around
the United
States? Is that one of the
reasons that people are paying
attention to this, where they
can
see this in themselves?
NIHAD AWAD: Unfortunately, I
have to say, yes, it is
widespread.
There is a poisoned atmosphere
of Islamophobia that has plagued
our countries, cities and
towns. It has filtered even
through the school system. We
hear many, many stories like
this.
Luckily, Ahmed is clever. He was
able to tell his narrative. But
there are many untold stories
nationwide. And we, as a nation,
have to start a frank
conversation.
And I urge our national leaders,
religious leaders, at their
homes, in their places of
worship, everywhere, we have to
fight against xenophobia, any
kind of phobia, and just reward
diversity, but not punish
diversity or punish people just
because of their faith
traditions.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Finally, what
would you like to see in -- what
would you like to see
happen at the school, at the
local police department?
NIHAD AWAD: I would like the
school to look really at what
happened.
And they shouldn't justify what
they did. What they did was
wrong. And they have sent
the wrong message to teenagers
nationwide, not only in their
school. And I would like
that to be the last story. But,
unfortunately, knowing the
history of our society, we
learn,
but sometimes slowly.
HARI SREENIVASAN: All right,
Nihad Awad, executive director
of the Council on
American-Islamic
Relations, thanks so
much for joining us.
NIHAD AWAD: Thank
you for having me.
GWEN IFILL: On the "NewsHour"
online: For the last two weeks,
we have been showing you
some of the extreme conditions
faced by migrants and refugees
as they wind their way through
Europe. Correspondent William
Brangham spoke to many of them
along the Hungarian border,
as they tried to make their
way to a better life.
He talks about what he saw on
the latest episode of our
podcast, Shortwave. Find a link
to
listen on our home page.
And we have the final
installment of our series by
cartoonist Jack Ohman. If you
have been
following along, you know that,
ultimately, Jack's dad succumbs
to his illness, but, as
he writes, his dad's death was
nothing like he had imagined.
Find the cartoon on our home
page, PBS.org/NewsHour.
And that's the
"NewsHour" for tonight.
On Friday, we reunite with
Syrian refugees in Germany we
first met on their journey
through
Hungary.
I'm Gwen Ifill.
Join us online and again here
tomorrow evening with Mark
Shields and David Brooks.
For all of us here at the "PBS
NewsHour," thank you, and good
night.